---
title: "Telepathy"
date: 2020-09-09T08:40:35+02:00
draft: false
---

Nobody -- not even the devil -- can read a man's mind. A while ago my sister
told me about a man named Viktor Frankl who was interned in a concentration camp
during the Holocaust who found solace in the fact that no matter what they did
to him physically at least his mind was free. They could torment him physically
but his mind would always be his own.[1][2] This was during the Second World
War, and since then a lot has been invested into trying to understand and
manipulate the human brain: head transplants, artificial intelligence, powerful
nootropics and human brain interfaces may not be far off. In this essay, I
consider how telepathy would work hypothetically, that is, how thoughts might be
exchanged between two individuals.

Suppose that thoughts could be read by a machine -- let us call this
hypothetical machine the **Thought Reader 2000(TM)** -- and that a prisoner
whose brain is hooked up to this machine is being interrogated by someone.
Suppose further that this machine includes a television which can visually
display whatever thoughts the prisoner is having via a human brain interface
that connects the prisoner's brain to it so that thoughts are rendered onto the
television screen.

The interrogator may ask questions like: "Are you thinking about fruit?".  The
object of the experiment is for him to confuse or prevent the interrogator from
knowing whether or not he is indeed thinking about fruit or not. The very
questions being asked might cause him to start thinking about apples and bananas
but regardless, even if the prisoner wasn't thinking about fruit to begin with
his goal is to resist having his thoughts read by **Thought Reader 2000(TM)**.
How would the prisoner prevent the interrogator from reading his thoughts? We
might say that he would have to use the force of his will to think of anything
but fruit or perhaps nothing at all.

Perhaps instead of asking about fruit, the interrogator might ask the prisoner
whether he committed a crime or ask him questions about something private and
personal that the prisoner would not want to divulge.

**Update**
: My friend, Jordan Kadish, adds: Leading questions might affect the prisoner's
thoughts so a persuasive interrogator (assuming bad intent) will more often than
not get what they want out of the prisoner. Also people, people can think of
things that they didn't do. For example, I could imagine myself killing victim x
whereas in reality that may not be the case." **Though Reader 2000(TM)** would
be analogous to a lie detector. In light of my friend's observation, the machine
could perhaps also be branded **Thought Influencer 2000(TM)**.

This thought experiment raises some interesting ethical
questions. On the one hand we have considered a machine that could theoretically
be better than the best lie detector designed to date. On the other hand, the
**Thought Reader 2000(TM)** would in evil hands allow people to be tortured and
possibly driven to madness and despair.On the other hand, the benefits of such a
machine would enable people to communicate telepathically.  Two parties could
communicate telepathically by hooking themselves up via human brain interface
devices and communicate directly to each other's brains. The convenience of two
people who wanted a simple way to communicate seems undeniable.

Let us postpone ethical discussions for another time and now consider how two
parties (who are presumably good people) might communicate telepathically.
Suppose two parties A and B communicate telepathically. How should A and B
negotiate how they are to communicate to one another? A could ask
(telepathically): "I would like to tell you something, B" and B might respond:
"Yes, OK you can talk to me but I might not reply or "OK, A, I will let you talk
to me and I may not respond to what you have to say." The purpose of giving
specific replies such as these is to establish clear boundaries between what A
and B will allow so that their communication is concordant with what each party
will allow, and does not become invasive.

This implies that we need a circuit breaker to prevent either A or B from
sending or receiving thoughts from each other which they don't allow.  The
diagram below illustrates how two channels, a send and receive channel, would be
needed for each party to control what thoughts they are allowed to send or
receive to one another:

```
A ---> B (A sends)
A <--- B (A receives)

B ---> A (B sends)
B <--- A (B receives)
```

In quasi-cryptographic terms, we are describing way for two parties to negotiate
in order to communicate bidirectionally over a communication channel. If we
someday figure out how to enable everyone to communicate telepathically we would
need to ensure that such a protocol exists. The protocol envisioned above
depicts four circuit breakers between A and B:

1. A allows B to send thoughts to A
2. A allows B to receive thoughts from A
3. B allows A to send thoughts to B
4. B allows A to receive thoughts from B

The above idea is a nascent one and is admittedly a crude but nevertheless
interesting to consider but in the next century it may not be difficult to
imagine mobile devices being replaced by telepathy.

# References

[1]: At the Dachua Nazi concentration camp experiments were conducted on
prisoners to see if they could be mentally controlled. The scientists who worked
there were later absorbed by [Operation Paper Clip](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Operation_Paperclip) and became part of the CIA's
[MKUltra program](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Project_MKUltra).

[2]: Mind Control: "From Nazis to DARPA David Flores"
