---
title: "The Black Death, 1348"
date: 2020-09-12T17:07:21+02:00
draft: false
---

: The Black Death killed an estimated 25 million people in Europe, about a
quarter of the population. In 1348 Henry Knighton, an English canon at the Abbey
of St. Mary of the Meadows in Leicester wrote the following chronicle.


In this year there was a general mortality among men throughout the world. It
began first in India, and then appeared in Tharsis, then among the Saracens, and
at last among the Christians and Jews, so that in the space of one year, namely
from Easter to Easter, 8000 legions of men, according to widely prevalent
rumours in the Court of Rome, died in those remote regions besides Christians.
The King of Tharsis, seeing such a sudden and unheard-of mortality among his
people, set out with a great multitude of nobles, intending to seek out the Pope
at Avignon and have himself baptized as a Christian, believing the vengeance  of
God to have overtaken his people because of their sinful disbelief. But when he
had travelled twenty days he heard along the road that the plague had invaded
the ranks of the Christians as well as other nations, and therefore he turned
about to go back to his own country. But the Christians, following the
Tharsians, attacked them from the rear and slew 2000 of them ...

The dreadful pestilence penetrated the sea coast by Southampton and came to
Bristol, and there almost the whole population of the town perished, as if it
had been seized by sudden death; for few kept their beds more than two or three
days, or even half a day. Then this cruel death spread everywhere around,
following the course of the sun. And there died at Leicester in the small parish
of St Leonard more than 380 persons, in the parish of the Holy Cross, 400; in
the parish of St Margaret's, Leicester, 700; and so in every parish a great
multitude. Then the Bishop of London sent word throughout his whole diocese
giving general power to each and every priest, regular as well as secular, to
hear confessions and to give absolution to all persons with full episcopal
authority, except only in case of debt. In this case, the debtor was to pay the
debt, if he was able, while he lived, or others to fulfil his obligations from
his property after his death. Likewise the Pope Granted full remission of all
sins to anyone receiving absolution when in danger of death, and granted that
his power should last until Easter next following, and that everyone might
choose whatever confessor he pleased.

In the same year there was a great murrain of sheep everywhere in the kingdom,
so that in one place in a single pasture more than 5000 sheep died; and they
putrefied so that neither bird nor beast would touch them. Everything was low in
price because of the fear of death, for very few people took any care of riches
or property of any kind. A man could have a horse that head been worth 40s for
half a mark [6s, 8d], a fat ox for 4s, a cow for 12d, a heifer for 6d, a fat
wether for 4d, a sheep for 3d, a lamb for 2d, a large pig for 5d; a stone of
wool [24 lbs] was worth 9d. Sheep and cattle ran at large through the fields,
and among the crops, and there was none to drive them off or herd them; for lack
of care they perished in ditches and hedges in incalculable numbers throughout
all districts, and none knew what to do. For there was no memory of death so
stern and cruel since the time of Vortigen, King of the Britons, in whose day,
as Bede testifies, the living did not suffice to bury the dead.

In the following autumn a reaper was not to be had for a lower wage than 8d,
with his meals; a mower for not less than 10d, with meals. Wherefore many crops
wasted in the fields for lack of harvesters. But in the year of the pestilence,
as has been said above, there was so great an abundance of every kind of grain
that almost no one cared for it.

The Scots, hearing of the dreadful plague among the English suspected that it
had come through the vengeance of God, and, according to the common report, they
were accustomed to swear 'be the foul deth of England'. Believing that the wrath
of God gad befallen the English, they assembled at Selkerk forest with the
intention of invading the kingdom, when the fierce mortality overtook them, and
in a short time about 5000 perished. As the rest, the strong and the feeble,
were preparing to return to their own country, they were followed and attacked
by the English, who slew countless numbers of them.

Master Thomas of Bradwardine was consecrated by the Pope Archbishop of
Canterbury, and when he returned to England he came to London, but with two days
was dead ...

Meanwhile the King sent proclamation into all the counties that reapers and
other labourers should not take more than they had been accustomed to take,
under the penalty appointed by statute. But the labourers were so lifted up and
obstinate that they would not listen to the King's command, but if anyone wished
to have to have them he had to give them what what they wanted, and either lose
his fruit and crops, to satisfy the lofty and covetous wishes of the workmen.
And when it was known to the King that they had not observed his command, and
had given greater wages to the labourers, he levied heavy fines upon abbots,
priors, knights, greater and lesser, and other great folk and small folk of the
realm, of some 100s, of some 40s, of some 20s, from each according to what he
could give. And afterwards the King had many labourers arrested, and sent them
to prison; many withdrew themselves and went into the forests and woods; and
those who were taken were heavily fined. Their ringleaders were made to swear
that they would not take daily wages beyond the ancient custom, and then were
freed from prison. And in like manner was done with the other craftsmen in the
boroughs and villages ... After the aforesaid pestilence, many buildings, great
and small fell into ruins in every city, borough and village for lack of
inhabitants, likewise many villages and hamlets became desolate, not a house
being left in them, and all having died who dwelt there; and it was probable
that many such villages would never be inhabited.
